---
layout: page
permalink: /about/
author_profile: true
toc: false
sidebar:
    nav: "quicklinks"
title: "About"
---

I am a research physicist at NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory, as well as a lecturer in the Atmospheric and Oceanic
Sciences Program of Princeton University.  My research is concerned
with elements of ocean fluid mechanics and the role of the ocean in
the earth climate system. I make use of theoretical tools, idealized
process models, realistic numerical circulation models, and field
measurements.  I have active collaborations with scientists from
around the world, most notably in America, Australia, Europe, and
India.

Particular research topics in recent years include studies of Atlantic
and Southern Ocean dynamics; global and regional sea level variability
and change; transport of matter and energy by transient mesoscale and
submesoscale eddies; subgrid scale parameterizations of turbulent
ocean stirring and mixing; analysis methods aimed at revealing aspects
of the ocean as a turbulent fluid; and algorithms for ocean
circulation models.

As a lecturer, mentor, author, and editor, I aim to foster a
fundamental understanding of physical concepts and their creative use
in describing observed and simulated ocean phenomena. Towards this
aim, I strive to pedagogically articulate the foundations of ocean
fluid mechanics in articles, books, course notes, and lectures.  I am
particularly interested in revealing how concepts and tools from
mathematical physics can be leveraged to deepen our understanding of
the ocean, and for nurturing an appreciation of geophysical fluid
mechanics within the broader context of theoretical physics.
